How Banking Virtual Assistants Can Improve Your Banking Experience ?


In recent years, several major banks have launched new banking virtual assistants to help customers manage their online banking and everyday inquiries. Using the power of artificial intelligence (AI), these virtual assistants can help customers save time on basic banking tasks and get more value out of their bank accounts.

More people are getting accustomed to using voice-activated devices like Alexa, Siri and Google Assistant to do their everyday web searches, manage tasks, get directions, ask questions or give commands to smart devices within their homes. As voice technology gets more efficient and accurate, it could be easier for many people to conduct their banking by just talking to a virtual assistant on their phone, instead of entering information manually.

For the same reasons that online banking and mobile banking services have become more prevalent, several banks offer a more comprehensive range of virtual assistant capabilities.

Here are a few ways banking virtual assistants can improve your banking experience, and why you may want to try these new digital helpers.


Streamline Everyday Inquiries
If you want to get basic information about your bank account—without having to call customer service or scroll through the website—these virtual assistants can put the data at your fingertips.

For example, most banking virtual assistants, such as the Chase Digital Assistant,  help you check your account balance, pay bills or transfer money, view your investments and get your account routing numbers. They can also help you lock or unlock your credit or debit cards and handle other everyday banking tasks from your bank’s mobile app.

Save Time on Typing
Some bank virtual assistants are voice-activated. If you’re getting tired of fumbling around with thumb-typing and backspacing through incorrect autocorrects, a virtual assistant can offer a faster, easier way to get answers to questions about your bank account.

Some banking virtual assistants offer voice interaction, as well as typing, including:

Erica, the “virtual financial assistant” in Bank of America’s mobile app
U.S. Bank Smart Assistant, a talk, tap or type virtual assistant, available via the bank’s mobile app
These virtual assistants may be a better fit for customers who prefer to talk rather than text. If you love using other voice-activated tools on your phone, you can get that same kind of experience from bank virtual assistants.

Make Simple Transactions
Voice-activated banking virtual assistants, like Bank of America’s Erica and U.S. Bank Smart Assistant, can make it easy to quickly transfer money or make payments to businesses, friends or family.

For example, while talking to the U.S. Bank Smart Assistant, you can issue commands to execute simple transactions. For example, you can say:

“Transfer money from savings to checking.”
“Send John $50.”
“Schedule a bill payment of $200 to my auto loan.”
If you want to save time on everyday banking and get your transactions done without navigating multiple menus and screens, bank virtual assistants with voice technology can be a helpful tool. Most virtual assistants are available only through the bank’s mobile app, although the Eno assistant for Capital One is also available via text message or online banking.

Get Notifications About Unusual Activity
Capital One’s virtual assistant, Eno, provides automated alerts whenever it sees suspicious activity on your account, such as possible fraud, unusually large tips or duplicate charges. Eno also looks out for expiring free trials and notifies you when they are about to end; this can help you avoid paying for subscription services that you no longer want.

In the case you feel overwhelmed by the numerous emails and notifications arriving from the various apps and accounts in your life, a bank virtual assistant can be an extra line of defense to make sure your bank account is secure and that any unusual activity is valid and verified.

Banking Virtual Assistants vs. Chatbots
Voice activated virtual assistants are the most advanced form of a type of AI customer service technology that is sometimes referred to as “chatbots.” According to research from Cornerstone Advisors, as of the end of 2020, 13% of banks and credit unions were using chatbot technology for customer service. But there are a few key differences between these two AI technologies.

Chatbots tend to be a more straightforward form of customer service, such as a pop-up screen that can answer questions via typing and text only.

Voice activated virtual assistants are more advanced than simple chatbots and can handle a more complex range of questions and transactions than simple text-based inquiries. Virtual assistants can also handle more specific, personalized requests, such as sending money to friends and family, or quickly pulling up data on recent shopping trips.

Virtual assistants with voice recognition and personalized insights—not just simple typing and responses to basic inquiries—are the next evolution of AI-powered technology for digital banking and customer service.

Get Advanced Insights
Some banking virtual assistants not only help you make transactions, but also help you keep track of your spending and show you advanced insights about where your money goes. Bank of America’s Erica provides several key insights into your finances, including:

Weekly snapshot of spending
Search for past transactions
Monitoring recurring charges
Notifications of changes to your FICO credit score
Tracking account balance trends
The U.S. Bank Smart Assistant also offers spending insights, which you can access by asking simple questions, such as:

“How much did I spend at [store name] last month?”
“How many times did I go to [type of business] last month?”
Bank virtual assistants are starting to include the best of both mobile banking and personal finance apps.  These assistants can help people get more convenient access to their bank account and get better at managing their money.

Virtual Assistants Are Part of the Future of Banking
Banks are investing more heavily in digital technology, and digital banking is becoming the new normal. A recent Ipsos-Forbes Advisor survey found that 76% of Americans used their bank’s mobile app to conduct everyday banking tasks within the past year.

Although banking virtual assistants are still relatively new and were not listed among respondents’ choices for most valuable mobile app features, four of the top five most valuable tasks can be done via a bank’s virtual assistant:

Viewing statements and account balances (most valuable feature for 33% of respondents)
Transferring funds between accounts (31%)
Bill pay (28%)
Peer-to-peer payments (11%)
People clearly want to use their bank mobile apps to conduct transactions. As digital customer service technology gets better, and as people develop more of a comfort level with using voice-activated apps like Siri, Alexa and Google Assistant in everyday life, it’s likely that more people will use banking virtual assistants, too. As of February 2021, Bank of America reports that there are 17 million total users of the Erica virtual assistant, an increase of 67% since 2019.

Sometimes, people don’t know what they need from a new technology until they try it. Banks are still testing and developing new features for virtual assistants. And the AI technology gets smarter as it learns from more customer data and more interactions. Over time, it’s possible that the simple virtual assistants of today could become even more sophisticated tools to help customers manage their money and make higher-value financial decisions.

Banks are trying hard to be more innovative with digital technology to help their customers achieve financial success. The future of banking is likely to be shaped by smarter digital tools that deliver personalized financial insights and financial advice. Today’s bank virtual assistants are helping customers manage basic transactions and banking tasks. Some, like Erica and U.S. Bank Smart Assistant, are starting to take the next step, showing customers detailed insights about their spending and how their money works.

Find The Best Online Banks Of 2022
Learn More
Bottom Line
The smartest banks seek to build ongoing relationships with their customers, helping them get what they need and want from their money, and creating trust and adding value along the way. Today’s banking virtual assistants are part of the next evolution of digital banking. Look for more banks to add these tools to their mobile apps as part of the continuing effort to better understand their customers and help customers understand their money.
